Add CONTRIBUTING.md (#140)
cancerDHC/ccdhmodel: CONTRIBUTING.md

# How to contribute

The following is a set of guidelines for contributing to the CRDCH model repository.

## Development Environment Setup

This section describes how to set up the development environment needed to make the CRDCH artifacts from the CRDCH schema in YAML that is included with this repository.

You will need to install `Python 3.7+`, `Make` and `Poetry` in order to build the artifacts in this repository. One-time installation commands for Poetry are available for [macOS/Linux/Bash on Windows](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry#osx--linux--bashonwindows-install-instructions) and for [Windows PowerShell](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry#windows-powershell-install-instructions).

For most development tasks, you should be able to clone this repository using:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel.git
```

And then building all artifacts by using the included Makefile:

```shell
make
```

You can run the included unit tests by running:

```shell
make test
```

> 

Reviewer: I've just realized that we don't mention that you can regenerate the model by using:

```shell
make generate-model
```

Could you please add that here?

Author: Sure. It is easy to add.

  * Release branches: release-*
  * Hotfix branches: hotfix-*
* It is recommended to use the [GitFlow Git extension](https://github.com/nvie/gitflow) to implement the gitflow branching model locally.

### Pull Request

When you're finished with the changes on your code, create a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests), also known as a PR.

* PRs for feature branches should always merge into `develop`, while PRs for release and hotfix branches should always merge into `main`, unless there are good reasons to merge them into another branch.
* Don't forget to [link PR to issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) if you are solving one. A good way to do this is by writing `closes #[issue number]` somewhere in the PR description.
* Major changes, especially new features, should be documented in the CHANGELOG file in the PR so we can keep track of which version each change was incorporated into.

### Code Review

A pull request must be reviewed by **at least one other project member** before it is merged.

> > A CCDH engineer must review and accept your pull request. A code review (which happens with both the contributor and the reviewer present) is required for contributing.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this is needed any more? I think the previous sentence ("A pull request must be reviewed by **at least one other project member** before it is merged.") should be sufficient.

Author: Okay. I added the sentence as @sujaypatil96 suggested. The first sentence would be sufficient, since PR would not get automatically merged anyway. 

Thank you for your feedback, @gaurav!

* Don't forget to [link PR to issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) if you are solving one.
* **Which branch should I select on PR? base:?; compare:(the branch you made changes); Any rule on this?**
* **What about testing?***
* We may ask for changes to be made before a PR can be merged, either using suggested changes or pull request comments. You can make any other changes and commit them in your branch.
* As you update your PR and apply changes, mark each conversation as resolved.
* If you run into any merge issues, checkout this [git tutorial](https://lab.github.com/githubtraining/managing-merge-conflicts) to help you resolve merge conflicts and other issues.

## Development environment setup

1. Install [poetry](https://python-poetry.org/docs/), a tool for dependency management and packaging in Python.
2. Clone the repository to local.
`git clone https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel.git`
3. Create and activate a virtual environment.

> 

Reviewer 2: I reread through this today and am ready to approve. It's clear, pretty thorough and the workflow is disciplines but still flexible. Thanks @jooho-lee-kim and @sujaypatil96 

We might be able to do some minor rephrasing improvements later on.

> 

Reviewer: I wanted to add a paragraph above this pointing out that _ideally_ nobody should ever need to mess with virtual environments or building wheels directly: `make` should handle generating the artifacts, `make test` should be able to validate the artifacts, and `poetry publish` should be able to publish the Python data classes to PyPI.

# How to contribute

> The following is a guideline for contributing to this repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following is a set of guidelines for contributing to the CRDCH model repository.
```

## Create a new issue

If you spot a problem with the code or documents; want to report bugs; or want to suggest enhancements, [search if an issue already exists](https://docs.github.com/en/github/searching-for-information-on-github/searching-on-github/searching-issues-and-pull-requests#search-by-the-title-body-or-comments). If a related issue doesn't exist, you can open a new issue using an [issue form](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel/issues/new/choose). You can choose either "Bug report" or "Feature request." If your issue doesn't fall under either categories, please use "Open an blank issue" to report your problem.

### How to use labels?

If you report an issue using predefined issue forms, each form automatically tags a label for you. You can also add tags manually. You can find the list of labels currently being used in this repository at [labels](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel/labels) page.

## Solve an issue

Scan through our [existing issues](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel/issues) to find one that interests you.

> * The issues can be self-assigned and/or assigned by any members of the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The issues can be self-assigned and/or assigned by any members of the team. Please do not start work on an assigned issue without checking with the assignee, who might be already working on the issue, and please unassign yourself if you can no longer work on that issue.
```

* The issues we should tackle first are listed on 'standing reference' section of the Tools team meeting notes.

> * The issues we priotize each quarter can be found at [Milestones](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel/milestones) page. The issues are categorized in next release of the CRDCH model, improvement of model generation, model testing, and model documentation, and future goals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Issues we are currently working on are grouped using [Milestones](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel/milestones). Milestones group thematically related issues that are due to be completed by a particular date.
```

### Create a branch

We follow the [gitflow](https://nvie.com/posts/a-successful-git-branching-model/) workflow for branching practice and naming convention.
(Discussions on branching model and branching practice are ongoing.)

> * The repo holds two main branches with an infinite lifetime: `master` and `develop`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The repo holds two main branches with an infinite lifetime: `main` and `develop`
```

* The supporting branches we may use are:
  * Feature branches
  * Release branches
  * Hotfix branches
* Naming convention of the branches

>   * Feature branches: You can name your branch anything except `master` and `develop`. You can add a short descriptor of the task, and/or an issue ID to the name of the branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Feature branches: You can name your branch anything except `main` and `develop`. You can add a short descriptor of the task, and/or an issue ID to the name of the branch.
```

  * Release branches: release-*
  * Hotfix branches: hotfix-*
* It is recommended to use the [GitFlow Git extension](https://github.com/nvie/gitflow) to implement the gitflow branching model locally.

### Pull Request

When you're finished with the changes on your code, create a [pull request](https://docs.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/about-pull-requests), also known as a PR.

> * You need to make a PR into the same branch that you created a sub branch from. Typically `main` or `develop`, unless you are proposing a modification to a feature branch or a bugfix branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* PRs for feature branches should always merge into `develop`, while PRs for release and hotfix branches should always merge into `main`, unless there are good reasons to merge them into another branch.
```

> * Don't forget to [link PR to issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) if you are solving one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Don't forget to [link PR to issue](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) if you are solving one. A good way to do this is by writing `closes #[issue number]` somewhere in the PR description.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Major changes, especially new features, should be documented in the CHANGELOG file in the PR so we can keep track of which version each change was incorporated into.
```

### Code Review

> A pull request must be reviewed by **at least one other project member** to get merged quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A pull request must be reviewed by **at least one other project member** before it is merged.
```

> A CCDH engineer must review and accept your pull request. A code review (which happens with both the contributor and the reviewer present) is required for contributing.

* You can add `unittest` tests to the repo as well.
* We may ask for changes to be made before a PR can be merged, either using suggested changes or pull request comments. You can make any other changes and commit them in your branch.
* As you update your PR and apply changes, mark each conversation as resolved.

> * If you run into any merge issues, checkout this [git tutorial](https://lab.github.com/githubtraining/managing-merge-conflicts) to help you resolve merge conflicts and other issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you run into any merge issues, checkout this [git tutorial](https://lab.github.com/githubtraining/managing-merge-conflicts) to help you resolve merge conflicts and other issues. Please also don't hesitate to ask other project members for help!
```

> ## Development environment setup

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Development environment setup

This section describes how to set up the development environment needed to make the CRDCH artifacts from the CRDCH schema in YAML that is included with this repository.

You will need to install Python 3.7+, Make and Poetry in order to build the artifacts in this repository. One-time installation commands for Poetry are available for [macOS/Linux/Bash on Windows](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry#osx--linux--bashonwindows-install-instructions) and for [Windows PowerShell](https://github.com/python-poetry/poetry#windows-powershell-install-instructions).

For most development tasks, you should be able to close this repository using:
    ```shell
    git clone https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel.git
    ```

And then building all artifacts by using the included Makefile:
    ```shell
    make
    ```

You can run the included unit tests by running:
    ```shell
    make test
    ```

You can publish the code to PyPI by running:
    ```shell
    poetry publish
    ```

Detailed instructions on setting up the development environment without using the Makefile are provided below.

2. Clone the ccdhmodel package repository.

    ```shell
    git clone https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel.git
    ```

3. Create and activate the virtual environment.
4. Run the following commands to build ccdhmodel and install the package along with all of its dependencies:

    ```shell
    cd ccdhmodel  # change directory to ccdhmodel
    git checkout main  # switch to main branch of ccdhmodel
    poetry build # build source and wheel archives
    pip install dist/crdchmodel-x.y.z-py3-none-any.whl  # install wheel file
    ```

    **note**: x.y.z is the version number listed on pyproject.toml.

5. To test new changes made to any of the modules within sheet2linkml, do the following:

    ```shell
    # make changes to any files or modules
    pip uninstall ccdhmodel  # uninstall package
    poetry build
    pip install dist/crdchmodel-x.y.z-py3-none-any.whl  # install wheel file
    ```

* If you want to generate LinkML artifacts, follow the instruction on [Generation of LinkML artifacts](https://github.com/cancerDHC/ccdhmodel#generation-of-linkml-artifacts).

> ## Format code with `black`

Reviewer: I would suggest moving the `black` information up into the "Create a branch" section above, since that's where people are actually going to be doing development work :). Alternatively, it might be a good idea to move the entire "Development environment setup" section to the top of this document, followed by a section on how to submit issues/create branches/make PRs. What do you all think?

Author: Yes, moving the "development environment setup" section to the top of the document sounds good.
